
# Logic, or rational thoughts on the powers of the human understanding; with their use and application in the knowledge and search of truth.
**By Christian Wolff**


## Preface to the First Edition

A more excellent gift than the understanding, Heaven has not bestowed on man: disordered or weakened in this, he becomes a child, or worse than a wild beast; and thus unqualified to honour God, and be of Service to all his fellow creatures. So that the more he acts up to the character of a man, in the use of the powers of his understanding, the more he is entitled to the appellation. Every man therefore, but especially whoever sets up for the character of learned, should exert himself to attaining the ready use of these powers. But yet, this is what very few employ their thoughts about, most people making learning a business of mere memory; and avoiding nothing so solicitously, as serious reflection. And hence it is, they have the utmost aversion from everything, that requires close application and attention, and that leads to a dexterous and ready use of their understanding: on the contrary, are extremely fond of any idle tale, that amuses, that requires no great effort to understand, and that keeps up that mode of thinking, which, from their youth, they have had in common with the unlearned herd. But the powers of the human understanding can no otherwise be known, than from the experience which we have in exerting them. So that those, who are mere compilers of the thoughts of others, and unpractised themselves in the business of invention, never once forming to themselves any conception of a solidly demonstrated truth, can least of all know the powers and right use of the understanding, exept what little they may have read thereof in good books. But Besides, that such are very rarely to be met with on the shelves of booksellers, I am afraid, were one, unexperienced in the solid science, to light on such, he would scare understanding them.


And thus there is no other possible mean to arrive at this knowledge, than by learning to form just conceptions of solidly demonstrated truths, and then examining how they might have been found, and when by this means we attain to some practice in reflection, to endeavor to investigate unknown truths ourselves: and lastly, to make it our business to enquire into the reason, why we gain so distinct a conviction from demonstrated truths, and how it comes, that from a few known truths, we can draw others, till then unknown.


A person must be either lost to all shame or extremely ignorant, who would pretend to say, that our of the province of mathematics, truths as solidly demonstrated, and discoveries as just and geniune, are to be met with, as therein. For out of the mathematical province, men either write in a quite different manner, or they attempt the mathematical method. In the first case, intelligent persons observe much confusion, fail not to complain, that the terms are either not at all, or seldom properly defined; that many things are affirmed without any, and others, without a sufficient proof, and often very erroneously proved. But in the second case, no one has, to this day, succeeded, who wanted to employ the method of mathematical demonstrations in the other disciplines. *Descartes*, though a great mathematician, never more clearly shewed the weakness of his proof for the being of God, than when, at the persuasion of *Mersennus*, a very learned French monk, he propounded it in the geometrical manner. *Spinosa*, in Ethics, and *Raphson*, in his Demonstration of God, have acquitted themselves but poorly in the business of demonstration, though both of them men of understanding, and no novices in mathematical knowledge. They defined many terms by others equivalent or synonymous; assume undemonstrated, that which often most required demonstration, and sometimes connected their syllogisms illogically. And therefore the mathematical sciences alone remain, from which we are to learn the genuine life of the powers of the understanding. And with this view I have, in my German Elements of Mathematics, made it my business to propound, as much as possible, every thing in such a manner, as it might have been at first discovered, and in my colleges or lectures inculcate particular remarks, in order, as much as may be, the bring my hearers to a habbit of reflection, against which, they have besides, many rubs and impediments in the way. But I will here rather appearl to the testimony of others, than to my own experience. We generally hold Locke's Essay as a work extremely ingenious. But to what, pray, does Locke himself ascribe his ability of understanding, and what means does he recommend, in order to attainment thereof? On consulting his book *on the Conduct of the Understanding*, it will be found, that he attributes all his penetration to mathematical knowledge, particularly the algebraical. I will here adduce no farther testimonies, as they may be found in the Preface to the Mathematical method prefixed to my German Elements of Mathematics. And this has all along been my principal view, in applying myself with such earnestness to the study of the mathematics. Now whatever of most ready and necessary use I remarked in the perusal of mathematical writings, or gathered from repeated reflection on the powers of the human understanding, I inclined to bring into short rules. And from my own experience, I can assure my readers, that these rules are still extremely serviceable to myself, either when I pass a judgment on any discovery, or want to investigate any truth: and I doubt not, but others will find a like benefit. Yet I cannot omit suggesting that to the ready use of these rules, it will contribute much, if with care they peruse my German Mathematical Elements; and, as they proceed, observe, how the rules are there applied. For as habit comes by exercise, exercise consists in employing much reflection on truths that are duly proved.

To conflude, I must own, that when I first began to reflect on the powers of the human understanding, I found myself much at a loss in many particulars, and, in some things, fell unnecessarily into round-about ways, till the ingenious thoughts of Leibnitz, on the knowledge of truth, and on notions or ideas, in the Leipsic Acts of the year 1684, p. 573, afforeded me a great and unexpected degree of light; so that I was surprised, that others, who had undertaken to write on the same subject since, had not taken any notice thereof. I heartily wish that the studious may receive such benefit from this work, as I inteded them. And when my wish is accomplished, I shall with greater alacrity and earnestness, exert myself in setting up a like light for them in the other parts of philosophy.

Halle, October 18, 1782


### Advertisement to the *Second Edition*

I have thought it not unuseful, to add many more examples from every branch of science, for the illustration of the rules. No one can be ignorant, that examples are not only of use for understanding, but also for applying the rules. And this has been particularly done in the first chapter concerning notions, as this is a capital matter, on which a great deal depends, and which is no where else so fully explained. And from this, I hope, everyone will see, that my rules are general and hold, not only in mathematics, but in every branch of solid knowledge. And as in the chapter of syllogisms, if we would reflect orderly and proceed securely; I have thought it not unserviceable, to subjoin it immediately to the chapter on propositions, previous to both the chapters wherein I shew how to draw propositions either from experience, or *a posteriori*, or from definitions and other previously known proposisions, or *a priori*. In this manner I always premise whatever is to be of use in the following chapters. The first chapter on notions, and the fouth on syllogisms, are two of the most important: for solid knowledge depends principally on distinct notions, and orderly-deduced demonstrations. I perfectly well know, that some people reject both; despite what they cannot imitate: and they do well; their aim is reputation with the ignorant, and not solid knowledge.


Whoever will dexterously apply the rules concerning distinct notions and demonstrations orderly carried on, must, as I have already often hinted, join the study of mathematics with logic; thus the use of the rules will become more ready: nor will he, like those who use their five senses more than their understanding, be all his life long tossed amidst perpetual fluctuations of opinions.


Halle, March 5, 1719


### Advertisement to the *Third Edition*

I have always reckoned, that what this little book contains, is among the best things, I know: for I have repeatedly experienced, and do still at this day experience, the utility of the rules given therein, in investigating and judging of truth, even the matehamtical. And I even venture to affirm, that on no other subject have I bestowed more time, than on the principle matters which I here propound, and which are the foundation of all; and it was not without much unnecessary circuition, and repeated reflection, I discovered and established, that which I here offer to the public. But as to my particular, these weighty matters concerning the conduct of the understanding in the knowledge and search of truth, employed my thoughts barely to the end that I might be enabled solidly and with certainty to discover this truth, and pave a smoother way for others in which they might tread without lett and circuotion, and thereby arrive to useful knowledge; so with the same view, I published them, for othersin like manner to enjoy the same benefit, I myself abundantely draw from them. It therefore give me no small pleasure to find, from the extraordinary sale of this little book, and from the many accounts, which I have received from different hands, that others begin to see the utility of my rules, and to hold them in equal esteem. But they will be enabled to use them with the same good success, if they happen to have time and opportunity to exercise themselves in mathematical demonstrations; of, in case circumstances will not admit of this, to examine, with care, my philosophical works. And in order the more easily to effect this, I have, in this new edition, given some directions for that purpose. With this view, the fundamental rules are illustrated with a greater number of examples, in order, the better to understand them; and I have besides, pointed out those parts of my writings, wherein the matters, proper for illustration, are contained. And this was the only reason of my making a very few additions in this edition, without altering the number of paragraphs. And as at the very first I brought nothing into this book but what was of undoubted utility, and necessary to be at all times retained, so at this present, I find no reason to alter my opinion. For, though a great deal more might still be introduced into it, not without utility, but not so indispensably necessary to every one; it would thwart my present intention, and render the book unserviceable to many. I, at present, content myself with what is absolutely necessary, especially as besides, the business turns not on a multiplicity of rules, as on the repeated use of a few: practice must effect more than rules. Whoever knows rightly to use a few rules, may be able to find out more himself, when he has occasion for them. He who studies algebra, in the manner I usually propound, will be convinced of the truth of what I say, and others will in time from their own experience, which I heartily wish, may be the case of every one, who has an ardent desire for truth.

Halle, February 10, 1722


### Advertisement to the *Fourth* and *Fifth Editions*.

As in the 1725 the fourth edition came out, the then circumstances afforded me occasion to touch on two points in chapter XIV. on which I had not thought in the preceding editions namely, as from my own experience I had learned, that people blended the indirect method of demonstrating, or that *per absurdum*, with the wretched manner of drawing consequences, and as it is highly important not to confuse both methods in the business of refutation, I pointed out distinctly the difference. And as I was no less aware, that some people blended apologetical with polemical writings, and would refer to the former what I intended for the latter in the said chapter, I thought it also adviseable to remove this mistake, and therefore I have added, by way of conclusion, the manner in which persecutors are to be treated.


In this fifth edition I have endeavoured to render the book still more useful, not only by inserting a few, yet important, things up and down, but by adding the whole of chapter XVI. wherein I shew the manner of attaining a logical habit. Among the new insertions may be also reckoned, that which I hint, chap I. §. 48, concerning the difference between essentials and properties, as it contributes not a little to the rightly understanding definitions, and as I saw, that some, from the defect of this knowledge, found themselves at a loss, even in definitions duly framed. As to the rest, everything stands as in the several preceding editions; for I have written nothing, but what at the first publication I found, on repeated experience, to be justly true: and the same, all others may experience, who chuse to go by it in their studies. And I earnestly wish, that many more may have the same happy experience; and then at length, Understanding and Virtue will come to flourish among men, and I shall have fully reached the end, which I propose to myself in my manifold and extensive labours.


Marpurg, April 5, 1727.



<h1>The Author's Short View of the Following Logical Treatise, Together With The Reasons for his Manner of treating the Subject.</h1>


I have undertaken to handle philosophy in such a manner, as shall be of most service to persons in their several future  stations and conditions in life; as I deem it a highly pernicious opinion, that we learn it with no other view, than to have matter idly to talk about in company, to furnish subjects of dispute in the schools, and matter of wrangling and contention to the perverse learned world. I have therefore, in this *treatise*, kept in *view* the same salutary design, separated the necessary and useful from the superfluous and useless, and treated at large, on the utility, which a few rules may be of, in a great variety of places.


Logic I divide into two principal parts, the theoretical, or that which contains the rules of logic, and the practical, or that which comprises the manifold uses of these rules. To the first part, belong the four first chapters: to the second, the remaining chapters.


In the theoretical part, I handle the three operations of the understanding, as they are commonly called, viz. notions or ideas, judgments or propositions, and syllogisms or ratiocinations; in the practical part, I shew the utility of this doctrine, in the investigation of truth, both from experience, by means of a due use of the senses, and from rationcination, by means of the right use of the understanding: and moreover, its utility in the passing a judgment on truths, on books, in conviction, in refutation, and in disputation.


The three operations of the understanding are the ground-work of the old Aristotelic logic, as handled by the school-men, but which many of the moderns have rejected in their logical treatises: but as I never regard whether a thing be old or new, whether in esteem or disesteem; So neither in this case: but rest satisfied, if a thing is well-grounded. For the business of logic is to shew, how we may use the understaning in the knowledge and search of truth: it explains distinctly, whatever passes in the sould, whenever we come to the knowledge of a thing and therefore, not different from the natural logic. It gives no other rules, than those which nature herself prescribes, only explains them more distinctly. Now, let anyone consider, wherein all our knowledge consists: either we barely represent objects to our mind, or we form a judgment about them: and consequently our knowledge consists either of notions or of judgments. When we form a judgment of a thing, we [ga]ther appropriate thereto, whatever we immediately observe therein, or conclude from the representations of the objects; thee other drawn by ratiocinatio: the former, i call intuitive judgments; the latter, discursive. To all this knowledge (more we have not) we require three operations. We either barely represent an object to ourselves, without proceeding any further; or we form a judgment thereon, other from the notions themselves, or by means of syllogism. And thus the whole reducible to these three operatioins; viz. representing an object, judging of it, reasoning about it. And therefore, I should not possibly explain any more, than these three operations of the understanding, to the end the artificial might now be made to differ from the natural logic. But as we cannot possibly judge of an object, without a representation thereof, unless we would by rote repeat the judgment of another person, it is absolutely necessary to treat first of simple representation or notions. And as these representations are usually expressed by names or terms, in order to be able to express our mind concerning them; and as words or terms are absolutely useful and necessary in forming judgments and ratiocinations; I have, directly after the notions, explained the use of terms, so far, as in the operations of the understanding, they stand for, or replace the notions. And lastly, as in ratiocinations, judgments are presupposed to be known, and to be readily formed, and as intuitive judgments arise from simple representations; so I have, in the second place, treated of judgments and propositions, and in the third, of syllogisms or ratiocination.


Here in passing, I hint, once from all, my manner of assuming what another advances; namely, if I understand the meaning of his proposition, I make as if I knew nothing at all of the matter, but were just then, for the first time, to investigate the truth in this point. I therefore begin to consider, whatever is necessary for that purpose, and I take care to observe, whether the proposition derives from any of the truths, or experiences, that I already  know. If so, I admit it as true, if I find the contrary, yet this gives me an opportunity to investigate the truth, though the other has come short of it. And even in this case, I acknowledge him for my guide, and so far am I from vilifying him on account of his error, that I am rather inclined to justify him, as much as may be, and therefore more impartially to weigh, what share of error he is chargeable with. And hereby I fail not to gain, that whatever I assume from others, is sure to agree with my former sentiments, without any apprehension of a contradiction. But hence too it happens, that I sometimes assume the opinions of others but in part, and on this account also, never maintain or reject any proposition, from the same reasons that others do, I here frankly declare all the art I am master of, as some may receive benefit by it; for I have nothing more at heart, than that truth be received as such, and applied to the common utility. And therefore, when I meet with any thing that furthers me in knowledge, I am quite impatient, till all, who have a real esteem for truth, be made to see the benefit thereof, and successulyy apply it to the common advantage. I am far from setting up to out-vie other people in any respect, rather rejoice, when out-veid by them; and both love and honour them, as they thereby afford me a fresh incentive to proceed with greater alacrity, in the task I have undertaken; and as I learn from them, what may serve to promote a farther progress in knowledge.


Leibniz * has distinctly explained the difference there is between notions in general, a subject recommended by Descartes † as extremely useful in the knowledge of truth, and which, he and his followers unsuccessfully attempted. Descartes proceeded no farther, than to clear and distinct ideas; Leibnitz added, adequate, which I afterwards found he had taken from the celebrated Dominican monk and subtle philosopher, Valerianus Magnus. This distinction of notions I examined after my manner, and found it just. Only I thought it needful, farther to distinguish notion, into compleat and incompleat, as not only of use in logic, but in the several branches of philosophy, where there is the greatest reason to settle the limits between distinct and confused knowledge. This last distinction, which I have added, is equally with the others founded in our notions; in regard, all distinct ideas are not altogether such, but some in part only distinct, and in part confused.

\* Act Erudit. Ann. 1684. p. 537.

† De Methodo.


Our representations are either of singular or individual things, or of universal. Individuals are no objects of science, but general or universal notions are, to the end we may be enabled to form general judgments or propositions, which may be of use in ratiocinations or syllogisms.


The distinction, used in the common logic, of individual, genus and species, I have retained, as of use in propositions and syllogisms, but have explained them more fully, as I shew the reason of this distinction, and therefrom derive distinct notions of individual, genus and species, and it were to be wished that men always framed their judgments by genus and species; the reason of which apppears in syllogisms, by which discursive judgments are deduced.


Now, to the end that both the general distinction of notions, and their division into genus and species might be made useful, I have added several problems, of which, I have given the solutions from definitions, with the help of experience. For, as in the sciences, all depends on distinct and compleat notions, as may be seen from the doctrine of judgments and syllogisms, so I have also shewn, in what manner, from the representations of individuals, to form distinct notions, and those general, from the genus and species to which they belong, and from what cause, on the contrary, notions remain confused, and why again distinct notions may degenerate and become debased, and how far it is in our power to obviate this.


And as it is matter of no less importance, that we accurately distinguish the notions of genus and species, I have also shewn, how, from the notions of a species, to find that of a genus; and again, from the notion of a genus, that of a species; and from the notion of species that of another. For I have found, that neither the doctrine of Descartes, concerning clear and distinct notions, nor that of Leibnitz, and my improvement thereof, nor the scholastic doctrine of individual, genus and species, though cleared of its obscurity, can be with any advantage used, unless the problems adduced, can first be resolved, the which I have undertaken to do, in order to extend the limits of logic.


Now, though Aristotle wanted to bring the genus and species of things into some order, in what he calls the *Categories*, which would have been of considerable use, not only in framing definitions, but also judgments, had he succeeded in what he undertook, yet I have mentioned nothing in my logic about it, in regard, that what the common logic adduces concerning the categories or predicaments, is far from being sufficient for so important a purpose, as I adduce notion but what may be of indispensable use, both in the sciences and in common life, and absolutely necessary for those who want to know the truth, and apply it to the use of man, I have, as I think, had sufficient reason to omit it.


All this I advance, the the end, we may learn how, with benefit, to the end, we may learn how, with benefit, to employ the discoveries of others, and go on to build on the foundation they have laid: for this is the way to promote the sciences. It is not to be supposed, that when a man writes a system, every thing must be of his own growth or invention; as this would be to give out, that our predecessors had done nothing at all to the purpose. The inventions, which give the first rise to science, are but mean and inconsiderable: for as all truths are derived from others previously known, so the primary or original inventions must have arisen from common or vulgar notions, and therefore cannot go very deep. Should any one, therefore, who writes on a science, advance notion but what was his own discovery, he would at best, only give us the first principles of a science, or even pleasing fairy dreams, that have no manner of reality, whenever he happens to miss the true road; and sometimes, only common and well-known things, set off with uncommon and extraordinary phraseology. Whereas, if he happens to advance far, and to adduce any thing that is useful, he certainly must have taken the benefit of that light, which others held out to him. It is, however, certain, that if he had been the first inventor; for he has, in effect, drawn the whole from previous knowledge, just in the manner he would have done, if he were to make the discovery.


From what has been hitherto said, we may learn, how it is possible to cull from different authors, whatever is valuable in them, and yet the whole be properly connected. Whence, those are under a mistake, who imagine, that a connection is needless, as they assume the title of *Eclectics*, that is, adopt whatever appears to them the most probable in every writer. And therefore, Descartes had done better if he had retained of the old philosophy, whatever was valuable therein, as in fact, he has given occasion to variety of prejudices, which, in one or other respect, have much retarded the progress of knowledge, though it cannot be denied, but that our obligations to him are great.


In the sciences, our aim is to procure general knowledge; for which we lay a foundation by means of definitions: and to this tends all I have said concerning distinct, compleat and adequate notions. For distinct and compleat notions yield us definitions, and adequate give them mutual connexion; and nothing farther is necessary. And therefore, in the first chapter, I have treated of notions and definitions. Tschirnhausen, in his *Medicina Mentis* greatly commends real definitions, and prefers them to the nominal. But on a more mature reflection, I have found, that in the sciences, we may succeed well enough with nominal, and even draw from them real definitions. It is however not to be denied, that with real definitions we make an easier progress, than with bare nominal. Tschirnhausen exerts himself most, in what manner to investigate real definitions. But all that he says, are rules, which he has borrowed from the real definitions in geometry, of which Barrow, in his *Lectiones Geometricae*, had given a variety of examples, and from which Tschirnhausen took the hint. Now though, after the perusal of Barrow, I came better to understand what Tschirnhausen wrote, concerning the investigation of real definitions, yet I seen found, that according to the rules which he had laid down, real definitions could not well be investigated out of the limits of geometry. And on farther reflection, and after distinguishing the different cases, in which real definitions are investigated, I shewed in my lectures on Tschirnhausen's book, in what manner we attain to real definitions.


Now, as we endeavour to procure distinct notions of objects, to the end we may be enabled to form general definitions, and from these, intuitive judgments, as to which, the foundation of all solid knowledge in the sciences is laid; so it is necessary to allot peculiar names to every thing we distinguished in our notions, and by these to form representations of them. For our general knowledge is entirely symbolical, in order to its distinctness. And from this view, I have also treated of the use of words, and particularly shewn, how we may intelligibly express our mind, and how to be on our guard, not to blend empty sounds with things, together with the manneer, how the ordinary meaning of a word is discoverable. Whence we may again see, that I make it my business to propose whatever I think may conduce to the gaining a degree of solid knowledge. And thus, I imagine, I have explained the first operation of the understanding in a practical manner; so that nothing is adduced, which has not its determinate use, and nothing omitted, which is necessary to be known by him, who wants to get a sure and firm footing in the knowledge of truth, so he be careful to place himself in such a station in life, as that therein his knowledge may be usefully applied.


In explaining the second operation of the understanding, namely, the judgment, I have adduced no other distinctioins thereof, than what are necessary to be understood in the future use of logic, and in the third operation of the understanding. For I was unwilling to propound, what a man afterwards readily forgets; nor did I want, a person should learn philosophy, with a view to humour the vicious taste of the schools for idle disputation and wrangling; but in order to usefulness in future life, and in what are called the higher faculties. And therefore I have contented myself, with what is absolutely necessary for this purpose. I have, however, endeavoured to supply, whatever is deficient in the common logic. I have given a genuine notion of judgment, from the nature of the soul, and therefrom shewn the ground or reason of every thing I teach: which is not only of use, in order to know, that whatever is taught concerning judgments is strictly true, and agreeable to philosophical knowledge, which is to shew, why a thing is rather thus, than otherwise; but also farther serves, to render us qualified to draw intuitive judgments from experience; and when in demonstrations, we are to draw one from many other propositions, deduced by means of independent or detached syllogisms, to be able to proceed in demonstrating, and to connect the preceeding with the following syllogisms.


Generally, in logic, the distinction of propositions is omitted, but carefully attended to in mathematics, where propositions are distinguished into axioms and theorems, postulates and problems. This distinction I have thought necessary to explain, as being extremely useful in the genuine practice of logic, as a great part thereof is solely founded on this distinction. And lastly, as Tschirnhausen lays great stress on the distinction of being able to conceive of not conceive a proposition, or of not knowing, whether it is conceivable or no, and many misusing or misapplying all this, as he makes it the criterion of truth, of error, and of whatever is unknown or undiscovered; I have thought it the most needful to give a distinct notion thereof, as what Tschirnhausen has omitted to do. For without distinct notions, it is impossible to obviate misuse or misapplication.


Whatever is taught in the common logic, which is in so much disrepute with many, concerning syllogism, I have found to be just and true in every respect. But here again, I have propounded the subject in my manner, so as it might have been, by close reflection, deduced by the inventors; in order, not only to perceive its truth, but at the same time to shew, taht this is the practice or common manner used in reflection, which was here so much the more needful, as in the scholastic philosophy we have no other instance, where everything has been investigated with such ripeness of reflection, as what we find they have employed in the third operation of the understanding. And hence we may learn, how the best things may be held in contempt, doomed to reproach and reprobation by people, who are not in a condition to judge of the nature thereof; and yet this not always from inability, but as they give themselves no time duly to consider the matter. Whoever considerately peruses that which I have advanced on the subject, will find a pattern, in what manner we are to proceed in a course of accurate reflection, and to advance from one thing to another: and what he here learns, will be greatly serviceable in duly analysing mathematical demonstrations, and thereby acquiring an ability or habit of demonstration. But as at this day great prejudice is entertained against this doctrine, which I myself had also entertained in my early years, being then incapable of the reflection necessary to a solid insight into the nature of the subject; I have also made it my business to remove the same, and therefore circumstantially shewn their use in mathematical demonstrations, in the invention even of mathematical truths, in framing solid demonstrations, out of the province of mathematics, in the mathematical manner, and in the refutation of errors: from which we not only learn the genuine nature of demonstrations, but also obtain a pattern, by which to exercise ourselves in the other sciences.


But as the syllogisms of the second and third figures, are therefore only admitted as genuine, because reducible to the first, and as this reduction in general canot be shewn without much circuition, as may be sufficiently seen from the school-philosophy; and on the other hand, as the particular instances in these figures may, without any trouble, be reduced by any novice, to the first figure; I abide by the first figure only, and in general, only mention so much concerning the others, as is necessary for distinguishing their syllogisms. And this I have the rather done, as the syllogisms in the first figure are sufficient to all intents and purposes, and the other figures easily reducible thereto. Besides were we to shew, by the reduction of the syllogisms of the second and third figures to the first, from general principles, that they are equivalents to those in the first figure, and consequently just, there would remain much to be explained, which would be difficult for beginners to learn, and yet afterwards be of no manner of use to them: and therefore, I have omitted all that is otherwise taught, with respect to this reduction. And let me only add, that in particular, by this third operation of the understanding it may be seen, that what I have already said is true; namely, that the natural logic differs not from the artificial, and that this last is barely a distinct explication of the first.

After having justified the rules, which have advanced on the three operations of the understanding, I might there left the matter, but the love to truth, and the desire thence arising, of establishing certainty, and removing all possible scruples, have prevailed on me to bring matters to the text, to the end I might be convinced from experience of the justness of these rules, and have a full assurance, that I attained to the genuine logic. And this I mention here, that others also may examine my logic by the same text,or be ennabled to see, where the logics recommended by others, will stand the trial or not. I myself have experienced the power of prejudice with respect to logic, in the case of aiming at certainty, and seeing things with our own eyes. And in the first place, I have analysed mathematical demonstrations, and found, I never had had any instance, the ground or reason of which I could not assign from my logic. And hereby I discovered, that my logical rules are, that which a regular and compleat demonstration is in mathematics, particularly in geometry; and thus I have been convinced, that they are a just sample of the mathematical method. As to a second test or trial, I have considered, in what manner we regularly proceed to common or vulgar knowledge, and pass on from one thought or notion to another, and I have with pleasure observed, that the natural way of thinking is the very same with that, which I distinctly describe in my logic, and of which, I first made mention in my Mathematical Lexicon, under the article, *Demonstration*. From which I learned two things; (1) That the artificial logic differs not from the natural, but rather is a distinct explanation thereof, as has been already mentioned. (2) That when we consider the demonstrations in mathematics, we still proceed in the natural manner of thinking. Whence I farther came to know the reason, why mathematical demonstrations are so convincing, and why, by a diligent and repeated consideration of them, we extend the powers of the understanding. And thence also it was very evident to me, that we have the less reason to doubt, whether the mathemtical method is applicable to other subjects, as it is the natural manner of thinking. I in like manner recommend this text to others, in order to be convinced, how far a logic is good for anything. Lastly, I proceed to a third trial, and, both in mathematics and in other sciences, considered every thing in such a manner, as it was, or might at least have been, investigated by the inventors, in regard it is well known, that one and the same truth may be investigated different ways; and here I found, that my logic reached that end, in so far as logic is admissible on such occasions. But, indeed, I came to see, that the application of Logic is not alone sufficient for invention, but that, besides, we require other rules, of which I have made some mention in my metaphysics. I still continue to repeat those trials, and therefore, have not, from a prejudice of precipitation, taken up or entertained a groundless confidence in my logic.

As we learn logic, barely with the view of making a happier progress in the knowledge of truth, and of more easily avoiding error, I have not contented myself to reduce the theory thereof to practice, and to advance nothing but what is indispensibly necessary for this end; but I have also treated at large of the utility of logic, on all the occasions that can possibly offer to a person of learning. On the application of logic I have been more copious, than on the theory. And yet, in the praxis, I assume no other rules, than those established in the theory; and indeed, I had no occasion to do otherwise as I found them sufficient in so many different and extensive trials. And thus also, my logical rules hang all of them perfectly well together: and as I only distinctly explain the natural method, they also appear natural to every one, who reads them with attention and without prejudice, for he finds, that every thing passes in his mind, in the manner I describe. This application of logic has hitherto been entierly omitted; and therefore, as the theory has not been at the same time propounded in a practical manner, and as there was also a want of distinct notions, it is no wonder, that many have not been sensible of, and that some have absolutely denied, the utility of logic: but from the coincidence of natural and artificial, I entierly take off that objection. And that I have also considered every necessary case, in which a person of learning may have use for logic, may be easily shewn; for either he wants to find out the truth, or to inculcate it on others. Whoever attempts to discover truth, wants to learn it either from other people, or to investigate it by his own reflection. He who inclines to learn it from others, dos so, either by verbal instruction, or by reading, and thus must know in what manner to reflect on, and examine that which he hears, and pass a judgment on the books which he reads. Whoever would, by his own application, find out the truth, must do it, either by means of experience, in the due use of his senses, or by means of reasoning, in the rught use of his understanding, and thus he must understand, in what manner to proceed, as well in experience as when he attempts to draw one truth from another, by his own reflection and meditation. Whoever would inculcate truth on another, wants either to convince him of the truth, or to refute his errors, or to dispute with him on controverted points. Now, as I have shewn, in what manner to apply logic, when we wanted to find out the truth, both by experience and by our own reflection; and to pass a judgment on the truths discovered by others, and on their writings; and to convince or refute others, or to dispute with them; I imagine, that I have omitted none of the occasions, on which a man of learning may require the use or applications of logic.

Many years since, I gave a method of demonstrating the truth of the Christian Religion \*, much approved of by the Abbot *Molanus* of *Loccum*, who encouraged me to put that method in execution. But I suggested, that this undertaking presupposed a great many things, which must be previously made out: to which head I reckoned, the demonstrative method of explaining the escriptures, a natural theology, and a moral philosophy, scientifically or demonstratively executed. And on these I first applied my thoughts, to the end that, in so weighty a matter, nothing might be precipitated or rashly undertaken. And this gave me occasion of shewing also the use of logic, in the interpretation of scripture. And I soon observed, that the rules there given, where of good service, when in Astronomy, I came to resolve the question; namely, whether the motion of the earth about its axis and round the Sun, is contrary, or not, to scripture: for I found, that we can avoid the usual answer given by the Copernicans, viz. as though the scripture accommodated itself to the notions of the vulgar, an answer I could never relish. Other uses I shall at present omit, only hinting thus much, that a person acts contrary to the reverence du to the word of God, when he foists into scripture his philosophical thoughts, and often his errors, and gives them out for divine truths. For, when afterwards it comes out, that a person has entertained errors concerning natural things, this causes no small degree of scandal and offence to many, to find that there errors are maintained with as much zeal and warmth, as doctrines clearly express in scripture. And therefore it gives me a great deal of pain, when people, whose business it is to interpret scripture, and to search out the meaning of the Spirit of God in his word, carry themselves in an unseemly manner, in passing judgments on philosophical hypotheses, and misapplying the scripture to their own presumed advantage. But now, as the use of logic in interpreting scripture is also of service to philosophers, in order to defend themselves against the attacks of those, who would very inconsiderately urge and misapply the scripture, and consequently, the authority of God; I have also in this view thought it necessary, not to omit this use. And thus I imagine, it is at length evident, that I have sufficiently provided for all the uses and applications of logic.

## Preliminary Discourse Concerning Philosophy



